ENABLE SUDO ON SLACKWARE

OVERVIEW

Slackware does not enable sudo by default. Administrative access is
traditionally handled using su and the root account.

This document describes how to enable sudo in a clean and explicit way
by using the existing wheel group and granting it administrative
privileges via /etc/sudoers.

This approach follows common Unix practices while preserving
Slackware's conservative and explicit philosophy.


DESIGN GOALS

- keep privilege escalation explicit
- avoid modifying default Slackware behavior unnecessarily
- use group-based access control
- ensure configuration remains auditable
- prevent accidental lockouts


ASSUMPTIONS

- Slackware is running on the system
- sudo is installed
- the user has root access
- the system administrator understands the risks of sudo access


CONFIGURING SUDOERS

Always edit the sudoers file using a safe editor to avoid syntax errors:

    visudo

Alternatively, if visudo is not configured:

    vim /etc/sudoers

Add ONE of the following lines, depending on the desired behavior.


PASSWORDLESS SUDO

Members of the wheel group can execute commands as root without entering
a password:

    %wheel ALL=(ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL


PASSWORD-PROTECTED SUDO (RECOMMENDED)

Members of the wheel group must enter their own password:

    %wheel ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL

Save the file and exit the editor.


ADDING USERS TO THE WHEEL GROUP

Replace `yourusername` with the actual username and run as root:

    usermod -aG wheel yourusername

This appends the user to the wheel group without removing existing group
memberships.


VERIFYING SUDO ACCESS

Log out and log back in to apply group changes.

Verify sudo functionality:

    sudo whoami

If the output is:

    root

sudo is working correctly.


NOTES AND CONSIDERATIONS

- Slackware does not require sudo; su remains fully supported
- passwordless sudo reduces friction but increases risk
- limit sudo access to trusted users only
- always test sudo configuration before closing the root session
- syntax errors in sudoers can lock out administrative access


CONCLUSION

Enabling sudo on Slackware is a deliberate administrative choice, not a
default requirement.

By using the wheel group and explicit sudoers configuration,
administrators can balance convenience and security while preserving
Slackware's emphasis on transparency and control.


------------------------------------------------------------------

Last Modified: 2026-03-27 00:00:00 UTC
