EXPLORING HEIRLOOM-EX-VI: THE TRADITIONAL VI MODERNIZED

+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| tl;dr                                                            |
|                                                                  |
| heirloom-ex-vi is the actual 1985 ex/vi 3.7 source code,         |
| modernized by Gunnar Ritter and continued by Carsten Kunze.      |
| It is small, clean, and faithful to the original vi.             |
|                                                                  |
| For daily editing of normal-sized files it is a pleasure.        |
| For large files, ergonomic features like ruler, or multi-level   |
| undo, nvi remains the more practical choice.                     |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+


OVERVIEW

This document describes the heirloom-ex-vi editor, a continuation
of the original Berkeley/AT&T ex/vi 3.7 source from 1985.

Unlike nvi, which is a clean-room reimplementation written by Keith
Bostic in 1994, heirloom-ex-vi descends directly from the actual
historic source code released by Caldera under a free software
license in 2002.

The codebase is maintained on GitHub by Carsten Kunze (n-t-roff)
and represents one of the smallest, most direct paths from the
original vi to a modern Unix system.

Upstream:

    https://github.com/n-t-roff/heirloom-ex-vi


LINEAGE

The path from Bill Joy's original vi to today's heirloom-ex-vi
involves three people across forty years:

    Bill Joy            1976-1985   original ex/vi at UC Berkeley
    Gunnar Ritter       2002-2007   modernization, UTF-8, dynamic
                                    screen buffers, ANSI C
    Carsten Kunze       2016-2022   bug fixes, ./configure script,
                                    GitHub continuation

Each maintainer made conservative additions. None expanded scope.
The result is software that has been quietly improved without
being reinvented.


WHY USE HEIRLOOM-EX-VI?

heirloom-ex-vi offers a distinct set of practical advantages:

    - small, readable codebase (~25k lines vs nvi's ~38k)
    - lower memory footprint (~3MB RSS vs nvi's ~6MB typical)
    - direct lineage from the original 1985 source
    - clean dependencies (libc and curses only)
    - solid UTF-8 support for normal content
    - faithful classic vi semantics
    - hackable: small enough to read end to end

It is well suited for users who appreciate minimal, finished
software and who edit configuration files, source code, and
similar normal-sized text.


INTERNAL ARCHITECTURE

heirloom-ex-vi uses the classic Unix temp-file approach for buffer
storage, inherited directly from the 1985 source.

Key points of this design:

    * Temp file with line index:
      The file being edited is copied to a temp file. An in-memory
      table of line pointers is maintained, indexed by line number.

    * Block-based access:
      Lines are organized in fixed-size blocks within the temp
      file. The line pointer table tells the editor which block
      contains which line.

    * Compile-time size limits:
      The line pointer table has a hard ceiling defined at build
      time by LBLKS in ex_tune.h. The default VMUNIX build sets
      LBLKS=900, which allows roughly 230,000 lines or 30MB of
      typical text.

    * No external library dependencies:
      Unlike nvi, heirloom does not link Berkeley DB or any other
      database. The temp file scheme is self-contained.

This architecture is simple and efficient for files within its
limits, but does not scale to files of arbitrary size.


SIZE LIMITS

By default, heirloom-ex-vi can edit files up to approximately:

    - 230,000 lines
    - 30MB of typical text

Files exceeding this limit produce the error:

    Tmp file too large

This is not a flaw. It is a design choice consistent with the
Unix philosophy of using the right tool for the job. For very
large files, line editors and stream tools (ed, sed, awk, grep)
are more appropriate.

If larger files must be edited interactively, heirloom can be
rebuilt with the LARGEF compile-time option, which raises the
ceiling to roughly 5 million lines and 5GB of text. This costs
additional memory on every file regardless of size.


MINIMAL CONFIGURATION (EXINIT)

heirloom-ex-vi reads configuration from EXINIT or .exrc. A
minimal setup using EXINIT might be:

    export EXINIT='set showmode|set showmatch|set report=1|set list'

Note that heirloom-ex-vi does not support the following options
familiar from nvi:

    - set ruler        no continuous cursor position display
    - set searchincr   no incremental search

For position information, the historic ^G command displays the
current line number, total lines, and percentage through file
on demand.

For visual indent verification (useful in YAML and similar
indent-sensitive files), set list shows tabs as ^I and end-of-line
as $, making whitespace structure visible.


UNDO AND BUFFERS

heirloom-ex-vi follows the historic single-level undo model:

    u     undo or redo the last change (toggles)
    U     restore the current line to its original state

Multi-level undo, as in nvi or vim, is not supported.

For recovery of earlier deletions, the named registers a-z and the
numbered deletion buffers 1-9 work as in classic vi:

    "ayy  yank current line into register a
    "ap   put register a after cursor
    "1p   put the most recent deletion
    "2p   put the second-most recent deletion


UTF-8 SUPPORT

heirloom-ex-vi handles UTF-8 correctly for typical modern text.

Practical tests performed during evaluation included:

    - Portuguese accented text:
          ç á à â ã ê ó õ

    - General Latin-1/Latin Extended text

    - Mathematical and symbolic characters

    - Emoji and 4-byte UTF-8 sequences

    - Mixed UTF-8 text inside normal prose files

    - CJK ideographs with correct double-width rendering

In normal terminal usage on modern UTF-8 systems, the editor
behaved significantly better than many users would expect from
a vi implementation rooted in the 1985 source code.

Cursor movement, insertion, deletion, and screen rendering
worked correctly during these tests.

Combining characters (decomposed Unicode forms) have weaker
support, as noted in the upstream TODO documentation. For
pre-composed UTF-8 text, which is the common case on modern
systems, this is generally not a practical problem.

Compared to older vi clones such as elvis, heirloom-ex-vi
provides noticeably more usable UTF-8 behavior for modern
terminal workflows.


SYNTAX HIGHLIGHTING

heirloom-ex-vi does not include syntax highlighting. As with nvi,
this is intentional design rather than missing feature.

Highlighting can be obtained through external tools and the filter
command. For example:

    :w !source-highlight -s yaml -f esc | less -R

This pipes the buffer through an external highlighter (such as
GNU source-highlight) and displays the colorized output through
less. The buffer itself is not modified.

A small editor patch is required for ANSI escapes from the filter
command to render correctly inside vi mode. Without it, the
escape sequences are scrambled by vi's screen addressing. The
patch is straightforward (8 lines of code in ex_cmds.c) and
mirrors the terminal mode dance already used by the bare :!cmd
handler.


MEMORY COMPARISON

Measured on a typical small file (5KB YAML configuration):

    Editor              VSZ        RSS
    heirloom-ex-vi      ~3.8MB     ~2.9MB
    nvi 1.81.6          ~7.3MB     ~6.3MB

heirloom uses roughly half the RSS of nvi for the same file.

The difference comes from nvi's dependency on Berkeley DB 4.8,
which adds a baseline cost in mapped library pages and DB engine
state. heirloom links only libc and curses.

For files larger than heirloom's ceiling, this comparison no
longer applies, as heirloom cannot open them.


WHEN HEIRLOOM-EX-VI IS A GOOD CHOICE

heirloom-ex-vi is ideal for:

    - users who value minimal, finished software
    - editing normal-sized configuration files and source code
    - learning how classic vi actually works (small codebase)
    - environments where memory matters (~3MB vs ~6MB)
    - users who appreciate the suckless aesthetic
    - readers who want to understand the 1985 source directly

It is less suitable for:

    - very large files (above ~230k lines)
    - workflows that depend on continuous ruler display
    - workflows that depend on multi-level undo
    - users who rely on multi-window editing within vi


COEXISTENCE WITH NVI

heirloom-ex-vi can coexist with nvi without conflict if installed
to a non-system path. A typical setup keeps nvi as the system
/usr/bin/vi and invokes heirloom explicitly:

    alias hex='/path/to/heirloom-ex-vi/ex -v'

This preserves the Slackware vi-ex switcher and any scripts that
expect /usr/bin/vi to behave a certain way, while allowing
heirloom to be used for personal editing.


CONCLUSION

heirloom-ex-vi is the actual original vi, modernized with care.
It demonstrates how much can be achieved with a small, focused
codebase maintained by people who respect the original design.

For daily editing of normal-sized files, it is genuinely
pleasant to use. The tradeoffs (no ruler, single-level undo,
file size ceiling) are direct consequences of staying close to
the 1985 source, not oversights.

For users whose workflow depends on ergonomic extensions or who
regularly edit large files, nvi remains the more practical choice.

Both editors have their place. heirloom-ex-vi rewards the user
who wants to read and understand the code as well as use it.


APPENDIX: COMPARISON WITH OTHER VI IMPLEMENTATIONS

heirloom-ex-vi:
    - direct descendant of 1985 ex/vi 3.7
    - smallest fully-featured traditional vi
    - hackable, well-commented
    - no ruler, single-level undo
    - hard file size ceiling

nvi:
    - clean-room reimplementation (Bostic, 1994)
    - active maintenance via Debian patchset
    - ruler, multi-level undo, multi-window
    - handles large files via Berkeley DB paging
    - larger codebase, more dependencies

elvis:
    - independent reimplementation (Kirkendall, 1990)
    - unique display modes (hex, syntax, HTML browse)
    - limited UTF-8 support
    - sparse maintenance since 2003

busybox vi:
    - extreme minimalism (~2300 lines)
    - emergency/embedded use only
    - no .exrc, no filter, no maps, no ex mode
    - not suitable for daily use


UPSTREAM AND HISTORICAL REFERENCES

Project repository:

    https://github.com/n-t-roff/heirloom-ex-vi

Original Traditional Vi homepage (Gunnar Ritter, archived):

    http://ex-vi.sourceforge.net/

Related historical context:

    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_UNIX



------------------------------------------------------------------

Last Modified: 2026-05-09 00:35:00 UTC
