USING NVI AS A MINIMAL AND FAST TEXT EDITOR

+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| tl;dr                                                            |
|                                                                  |
| nvi is a fast, lightweight vi implementation designed for large  |
| files, low memory usage, and predictable behavior. It is ideal   |
| for servers, SSH sessions, and minimal Unix environments where   |
| vim is unnecessary or too heavy.                                 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+


OVERVIEW

This document introduces the nvi text editor, a clean and efficient
implementation of the original Berkeley vi written by Keith Bostic.
nvi is designed for speed, low memory usage, and predictable behavior.

It is especially suited for system administration, SSH sessions,
editing configuration files, and handling very large text files such
as logs or JSON dumps on Unix-like systems, including Slackware.

Unlike modern editors, nvi avoids complexity (plugins, scripting,
syntax highlighting) and focuses on reliability, efficiency, and
faithful classic vi behavior.


WHY USE NVI?

nvi provides the traditional vi experience with several practical
advantages:

    - extremely low memory usage
    - fast access to distant lines
    - excellent performance with very large files
    - simple configuration and predictable commands
    - small and maintainable codebase
    - strong alignment with the Unix philosophy
    - reliable behavior inside terminal multiplexers (tmux, mtm, screen)

These characteristics make nvi ideal for minimal environments and
users who prefer a distraction-free workflow.


INTERNAL ARCHITECTURE

nvi differs from many other editors in how it stores and accesses
text internally.

Instead of loading the entire file into memory as a simple array
of lines, nvi uses a database-backed storage model designed for
efficient random access.

In nvi 1.81.x, this storage is implemented using Berkeley DB
(version 3.x or newer), as described in README.DB3.

Key points of this design:

    * Database-backed buffer storage:
      Each line of the file is stored as a numbered record inside
      an internal Berkeley DB database. This allows efficient access
      to line N without scanning the file sequentially.

    * Record-oriented access:
      Line-based operations map naturally to record-number access,
      enabling fast jumps, searches, and edits even in files with
      millions of lines.

    * Memory efficiency:
      Berkeley DB manages paging internally. Only the necessary
      portions of the file are kept in memory, avoiding large RAM
      usage when working with huge files.

    * Internal use only:
      The database is not exposed to users and is not used as a
      general-purpose database. Edited files are not stored as
      persistent .db files.

    * External dependency:
      Unlike older historical versions, nvi 1.81.x does not embed
      its own Berkeley DB source code. Instead, it links against an
      external Berkeley DB library (DB 3.x or newer), either
      statically or dynamically depending on how it is built.

This architecture explains nvi's ability to handle extremely large
files smoothly while remaining lightweight.


CRASH RECOVERY

Crash recovery in nvi is handled separately from the main buffer
storage.

If an editing session is interrupted, recovery metadata is stored
in:

    /var/tmp/vi.recover/

Files named:

    recover.<id>
    vi.<id>

allow interrupted sessions to be restored using:

    nvi -r

These recovery files are independent of the Berkeley DB storage
used for normal editing.


MINIMAL CONFIGURATION (.EXRC)

nvi uses a simple configuration file named ".exrc". A minimal setup
might be:

    set showmode
    set showmatch
    set ruler
    set shiftwidth=2
    set tabstop=2

No plugins, runtime directories, or external tools are required.


WORKING WITHOUT SYNTAX HIGHLIGHTING

nvi does not include syntax highlighting. This design choice promotes:

    - reduced visual noise
    - clearer focus on text structure
    - consistent display across terminals
    - reliable behavior in minimal environments

For scripting, configuration files, logs, and remote administration,
syntax highlighting is optional rather than necessary.


UTF-8 AND ENCODING

nvi handles UTF-8 correctly for well-formed files. When loading
files with broken or non-UTF-8 encodings, it may silently truncate
content at the point of invalid bytes.

This is worth knowing, but it is not a concern for the primary use
cases this document covers: SlackBuilds, C source, YAML, JSON, log
files, and configuration files in /etc. These are reliably
well-formed UTF-8 in modern Unix environments.

For files with unknown or potentially broken encodings, verify the
encoding first (file(1), iconv(1)) before editing.


UNDO, MARKS, AND WINDOW SPLITS

Undo and redo:

    u     undo last change
    .     repeat undo
    uu    redo

Marks allow precise navigation:

    mx    set mark x
    'x    jump to line of mark x
    `x    jump to exact cursor position

Window splits:

    :vs   vertical split
    :E    horizontal split


RECOMMENDED USAGE WITH TMUX

Since nvi does not implement tabs, tmux is an ideal companion:

    - multiple panes
    - persistent sessions
    - fullscreen focus
    - fast switching between tasks

This keeps the editor itself minimal while still supporting
multi-file workflows.

nvi uses curses for terminal I/O, which means it behaves correctly
and reliably inside terminal multiplexers such as tmux, mtm, and
GNU Screen. This is in contrast to editors that write escape
sequences directly to the terminal, bypassing curses, which can
cause display issues in multiplexed environments.

Historically, screen-oriented Unix software such as vi depended on
terminal capability systems like termcap (and later terminfo) to
support many different terminal types efficiently and portably.

Modern terminal applications still inherit many concepts from this
design.


NVI ON SLACKWARE

nvi was added to Slackware -current on:

    Mon Jan 13 00:11:55 UTC 2020

This was its first appearance in the distribution, and it later
became part of the Slackware 15.0 stable release (February 2022).
Slackware 14.2 and earlier shipped with Elvis as /usr/bin/vi.

When nvi was introduced, Elvis was rebuilt to remove its /usr/bin/vi
and /usr/bin/ex symlinks. From that point onward, nvi provides those
symlinks only if they are not already supplied by another editor.

This preserves Slackware's long-standing policy of allowing users
to choose their preferred vi implementation.

Reasons for adopting nvi:

    - proper UTF-8 support
    - predictable behavior in modern terminals
    - smaller and more maintainable codebase
    - strong alignment with Slackware's traditional design

Slackware applies maintenance patches to nvi addressing:

    - UTF-8 and wide-character handling
    - build system portability
    - stability and bug fixes
    - long-term maintainability

These patches modernize nvi without altering its classic vi behavior.

Users may change the default vi/ex implementation using:

    pkgtool -> Setup -> vi-ex


ESSENTIAL COMMANDS

A concise nvi quick reference is available at:

    http://www.slackware.com/~r1w1s1/nvi.html


WHEN NVI IS A GOOD CHOICE

nvi is ideal for:

    - servers and SSH environments
    - editing configuration files in /etc
    - minimal or low-resource systems
    - large log files or JSON datasets
    - users who prefer classic vi behavior
    - workflows requiring speed and simplicity
    - terminal multiplexer environments (tmux, mtm, GNU Screen)


NVI ACROSS UNIX SYSTEMS

nvi remains widely present across BSD and Unix-like systems.

FreeBSD:
    base system vi implementation
    https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=nvi

NetBSD:
    ships nvi in base
    https://man.netbsd.org/vi.1

Slackware:
    adopted nvi in Slackware-current in 2020, replacing
    Elvis as the default /usr/bin/vi provider
    http://www.slackware.com/

Debian:
    provides nvi as an optional package in the official
    repositories
    https://packages.debian.org/nvi

Void Linux:
    provides nvi as an optional package
    https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/tree/master/srcpkgs/nvi

CRUX:
    provides nvi 1.79 through the ports system rather than
    as part of the main base distribution
    https://crux.nu/ports/


CONCLUSION

nvi follows the original Unix philosophy: simple, fast, and reliable.

Its database-backed internal storage enables excellent performance
with large files, while its minimal design keeps editing predictable
and distraction-free.

For Slackware and other Unix users seeking a lightweight, efficient
editor, nvi remains an outstanding choice.


APPENDIX: MINIMAL COMPARISON (NVI VS VIM VS ELVIS)

nvi:
    - fastest and lightest
    - excellent for very large files
    - classic vi behavior
    - ideal for servers and SSH
    - reliable in terminal multiplexers (uses curses)
    - no plugins, no scripting, no extras

vim:
    - feature-rich and extensible
    - best for IDE-like workflows
    - syntax highlighting, scripting, LSP
    - heavier and slower with huge files

elvis:
    - small and portable vi clone
    - unique display modes
    - suitable for rescue systems
    - limited UTF-8 support


UPSTREAM AND HISTORICAL REFERENCES

nvi originates from the Berkeley vi developed by Keith Bostic.
Historical documentation and background can be found at:

    https://sites.google.com/a/bostic.com/keithbostic/the-berkeley-vi-editor-home-page



------------------------------------------------------------------

Last Modified: 2026-05-24 16:42:08 UTC
