SLACKWARE GPG KEY BACKUP AND RESTORE

OVERVIEW

This document describes a simple and explicit method for backing up and
restoring GPG keys on a Slackware system.

The approach uses standard GnuPG commands to export public and private
keys, encrypts the private key before storage, and keeps backups in a
private Git repository for safekeeping. This allows keys to be easily
recovered on a new system or after a system reinstallation.


DESIGN GOALS

- use standard GnuPG tooling
- keep backups human-readable and auditable
- avoid proprietary backup formats
- allow easy restoration on new machines
- keep private keys protected at all times


ASSUMPTIONS

- Slackware is running on the system
- GnuPG is installed and configured
- Git is installed and configured
- the user has an existing GPG key
- the user has access to a private Git repository


BACKING UP GPG KEYS

List available keys with full key IDs before exporting:

    gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format LONG

Export the public key:

    gpg --armor --export your-email@example.com > public.key

Export the private key using the full backup option to ensure all
subkeys and metadata are included:

    gpg --armor --export-secret-keys \
        --export-options export-backup \
        your-email@example.com > private.key

Export the trust database:

    gpg --export-ownertrust > ownertrust.txt

Back up the revocation certificate. This certificate allows the key
to be revoked on keyservers if it is ever compromised:

    cp ~/.gnupg/openpgp-revocs.d/*.rev .

These commands generate the following files:

- public.key
- private.key
- ownertrust.txt
- *.rev (revocation certificate)

The private key must never be stored in plaintext. Encrypt it before
storing anywhere:

    gpg --symmetric --cipher-algo AES256 --output private.key.gpg private.key

Remove the plaintext private key immediately after encryption:

    rm private.key

Verify the encrypted backup is readable before relying on it:

    gpg --decrypt private.key.gpg > /dev/null


STORING KEYS IN A PRIVATE GIT REPOSITORY

Clone the backup repository:

    git clone git@git.sr.ht:~r1w1s1/gpg-backup
    cd gpg-backup

Copy the files into the repository:

    cp /path/to/public.key .
    cp /path/to/private.key.gpg .
    cp /path/to/ownertrust.txt .
    cp /path/to/*.rev .

Add and commit:

    git add public.key private.key.gpg ownertrust.txt *.rev
    git commit -m "Backup GPG keys"
    git push -u origin main

Only the encrypted private key should be stored. The plaintext private
key must never be committed to any repository.


RESTORING GPG KEYS ON A NEW SYSTEM

Clone the backup repository:

    git clone git@git.sr.ht:~r1w1s1/gpg-backup
    cd gpg-backup

Import the public key:

    gpg --import public.key

Decrypt and import the private key:

    gpg --decrypt private.key.gpg | gpg --import

Import the trust database:

    gpg --import-ownertrust ownertrust.txt

In most cases, importing ownertrust.txt restores the trust level
automatically. If GPG operations warn about untrusted keys, set
ultimate trust explicitly:

    gpg --edit-key your-email@example.com
    trust
    5
    quit

Import the revocation certificate into the keyring so it is available
if needed:

    gpg --import *.rev

Verify the key is available:

    gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format LONG

Remove the cloned repository after restore to avoid leaving key
material on disk:

    rm -rf gpg-backup


REPOSITORY SECURITY

- always use a private repository
- prefer SSH authentication
- never commit the plaintext private key
- restrict repository access to trusted users only
- enable two-factor authentication on the hosting provider where available


CONCLUSION

Backing up GPG keys is essential for maintaining long-term access to
encrypted data, password stores, and signed commits.

By encrypting the private key before storage and keeping backups in a
secured private Git repository, Slackware users can maintain full
control over their cryptographic material while ensuring reliable
recovery when needed.


------------------------------------------------------------------

Last Modified: 2026-03-07 15:07:18 UTC
